How Interpol traced the identity of ‘the woman with the flower tattoo’For three decades, her body has lain far from the streets of Cardiff where she was known as a vibrant, kind-hearted, if troubled, young woman.
Earlier this year, thanks to a groundbreaking cross-border operation, she was given an identity of sorts – the woman with the flower tattoo – as police teams across three European countries and the global law enforcement force Interpol tried to get to the bottom of her murder and 21 others.
Now, finally, she has her real name back. The woman whose body was found nudging up against a grate in an Antwerp river in 1992 was Rita Roberts, a 31-year-old from the Grangetown area of the Welsh capital whose last known contact with her British family was a postcard sent shortly before she was stabbed to death.
Her family and friends can mourn, Rita’s story can start to be told, and police in Belgium will look for new leads that may yet lead them to the killer.
Speaking at the end of a week when the woman with the flower tattoo made headlines around the world, Interpol’s François-Xavier Laurent, said he was glad that at least one of the 22 families of the Operation Identify Me women had some sort of answer.
Laurent said: “We did this campaign to provide closure and to give a name back to the victims. More than anything, we want to bring news, even if it’s sad news. I don’t think there’s anything worse than just waiting to get some information.
“I’m not trying to put myself in the shoes of missing persons’ families, but I think that at some point knowing what has happened gives more relief than never knowing. Even if it’s 31 years after the moment Rita disappeared, I think the family is at least grateful to know what happened to her and they can start their grieving process and hopefully maybe get some answers in the future about why and how she was murdered.”
Operation Identify Me was launched in May by the Belgian, Dutch and German police and Interpol, releasing details of the cases that would normally only be available to law enforcement agencies and giving grabby nicknames that would not be out of place in a thriller: the woman in the well, the body in the bog, the woman in man’s clothing and so on.
The body of the woman with the flower tattoo was found in the river near a sports and concert venue on 3 June 1992. She had been in the water for some time – they could only say she was aged 20-50 – and had suffered at least one stab wound. A major clue was the distinctive tattoo on her left forearm – apparently a black rose with green leaves and “R’Nick” written underneath.
Police appealed for help at the time but she was not identified and the trail for her killer went cold.
In May this year Operation Identify Me was launched, following a Dutch case in which a woman’s body was found in 1999 in an industrial waste container, partly encased in concrete.
Within days, the operation had a hit. A relative of Rita Roberts saw the image of the tattoo on a news website and alerted the authorities. They said Roberts had moved from Cardiff to Antwerp in February 1992. She had sent a postcode in May 1992 and not been heard of since.
“There are some messages, including Rita’s that straight away give you chills,” said Laurent. “You have a lot of details, a lot of information from the victim’s family that were not made public. You feel everything is clicking. Straight away when we had the information from Rita’s family, we felt something was happening here.”
He said the Belgian police should not be blamed for not identifying Roberts sooner. “It’s always easy to think 30 years later, this country should have done that. But there was no internet, DNA work was in its beginnings. The Belgian forensic institute started in 1993, the year after the body was discovered. Countries were not necessarily collaborating in terms of police information. Everything was on paper.”
It took six months before the police were happy to go public with Roberts’ identity this week. Her siblings, who are based in Cardiff and the north-east of England, issued a statement via Durham police, describing Roberts as “a beautiful person” who adored travelling. They added: “Whilst the news has been difficult to process, we are incredibly grateful to have uncovered what happened to Rita.”
Friends of Roberts from Cardiff joined in the tributes. “I can’t believe it,” said one. “Rita was a fabulous person … tough but so kind-hearted. I’m so sorry she died that way.”
Roberts was born in 1960 and lived near the docks, at that time a challenging neighbourhood. There appears to be no mention of her disappearance in back issues of the South Wales Echo, but there are two reports of court appearances by a woman called Rita Roberts whose age and other details match the missing woman. Two date from the 1980s and one from November 1991, just a few months before she went to Belgium.
The Antwerp public prosecutor’s office said she lived in the city for a few months and was never reported missing to the Belgian police. A spokesperson said she had “probably not” been the victim of a sexual assault. Her body remained in Antwerp. The prosecutor’s office said it knew she had a criminal record before it went public with her name.
According to a report from the University of Portsmouth’s Centre for the Study of Missing Persons, an average of 600 people in the UK go missing abroad each year.
“The overwhelming majority are found safe and well,” said Martha McBrier, the helplines manager for the charity Missing People. She praised Operation Identify Me’s work. “The not knowing is the worst thing. It never gets better, the feelings remain almost as raw.”
Even as they grieve, members of Roberts’ family have paused to remember relatives of the other Identify Me women. One said: “There are 21 other unidentified women who need to be reunited with their families and we very much hope that can be achieved.”LiveIsrael-Hamas war live: Israel issues fresh warning to leave Khan Younis; report of 26 killedIsrael issued a fresh warning to Palestinians in the southern city of Khan Younis to move out of the line of fire and closer to humanitarian aid, in the latest indication that it plans to attack Hamas in south Gaza after subduing the north, Reuters reports.
“We’re asking people to relocate. I know it’s not easy for many of them, but we don’t want to see civilians caught up in the crossfire,” Mark Regev, an aide to Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, told MSNBC on Friday.
Such a move could compel hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who fled south from the Israeli assault on Gaza City to relocate again, along with residents of Khan Younis, a city of more than 400,000, worsening a dire humanitarian crisis.
Israel dropped leaflets over Khan Younis telling people to evacuate to shelters, suggesting military operations there were imminent.Regev said Israeli troops would have to advance into the city to oust Hamas fighters from underground tunnels and bunkers but that no such “enormous infrastructure” exists in less built-up areas to the west.
“I’m pretty sure that they won’t have to move again” if they moved west, he said, referring to people in the area.
Because the western areas are closer to the Rafah border crossing with Egypt, humanitarian aid could be brought in “as quickly as possible”, Regev said.
Jordan’s foreign minister has said he does not understand how Israel’s goal of obliterating the Palestinian militant group Hamas could be achieved, Reuters reports.
Ayman Safadi said on Saturday:
He warned that Jordan would do “whatever it takes to stop” the displacement of Palestinians, amid heavy Israeli bombardment of the Hamas-run Gaza Strip in retaliation for Hamas attack on southern Israel on 7 October.
“We will never allow that to happen,” Safadi told at the IISS Manama Dialogue security summit in Bahrain.
The Israel-Hamas war has reawakened longstanding fears in Jordan, home to a large population of Palestinian refugees and their descendants. They fear that Israel could expel Palestinians en masse from the Israeli-occupied West Bank, where Israeli settler attacks on Palestinians have surged since 7 October attack.
Safadi said:
US president Joe Biden’s top adviser on the Middle East said on Saturday that the release of hostages held by Hamas would lead to a surge in the delivery of humanitarian aid and significant pause in fighting in Gaza.
“The hostages are released, you will see a significant, significant change,” Brett McGurk said at the IISS Manama Dialogue security summit in Bahrain.
Reuters also reports that Bahrain’s crown prince, speaking at the summit on Friday, called on Hamas to release Israeli women and children held hostage and for Israel in exchange to release from its prisons Palestinian women and children who he said were non-combatants.
Six Palestinians were killed on Saturday in an Israeli air strike on a house in Deir al-Balah in the southern Gaza Strip, Reuters has just quoted health officials as saying.
Twenty-six people were killed in a strike in the southern Gaza city of Khan Yunis, a hospital director said on Saturday.
Agence France-Presse quotes the director of the Nasser hospital as saying on Saturday it had received the bodies of 26 people, as well as 23 people with serious injuries, after an airstrike on a residential building in the region’s Hamad Town.
The Israeli military did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the report.
Israel issued a fresh warning to Palestinians in the southern city of Khan Younis to move out of the line of fire and closer to humanitarian aid, in the latest indication that it plans to attack Hamas in south Gaza after subduing the north, Reuters reports.
“We’re asking people to relocate. I know it’s not easy for many of them, but we don’t want to see civilians caught up in the crossfire,” Mark Regev, an aide to Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, told MSNBC on Friday.
Such a move could compel hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who fled south from the Israeli assault on Gaza City to relocate again, along with residents of Khan Younis, a city of more than 400,000, worsening a dire humanitarian crisis.
Israel dropped leaflets over Khan Younis telling people to evacuate to shelters, suggesting military operations there were imminent.Regev said Israeli troops would have to advance into the city to oust Hamas fighters from underground tunnels and bunkers but that no such “enormous infrastructure” exists in less built-up areas to the west.
“I’m pretty sure that they won’t have to move again” if they moved west, he said, referring to people in the area.
Because the western areas are closer to the Rafah border crossing with Egypt, humanitarian aid could be brought in “as quickly as possible”, Regev said.
Welcome to our rolling live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war. I’m Adam Fulton and here’s a look at the latest to bring you up to speed.
Israel has issued a fresh warning to Palestinians in the southern city of Khan Younis to relocate west to avoid crossfire and be closer to humanitarian aid amid indications that Israeli military operations there could be imminent.
The warning, from an aide to Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, could compel hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who fled south from the Israeli assault on Gaza City to relocate again, worsening a humanitarian crisis.
Meanwhile, a hospital director said 26 people had been killed in a strike on a residential building in Hamad, a neighbourhood in the Khan Younis area.
More on those stories shorty. In other news as it turns 8.15am in Gaza City and Tel Aviv:
A first consignment of fuel has entered Gaza after Israel bowed to US pressure for limited deliveries to allow wastewater treatment and the resumption of communications after a two-day blackout. Israel’s national security adviser, Tzachi Hanegbi, said on Friday the country’s war cabinet had agreed to allow two tanker trucks of fuel to enter the Gaza Strip each day, a quantity he described as “very minimal”.
The White House said fuel should be allowed into the Gaza Strip “on a regular basis and in larger quantities”, while welcoming the Israeli move.
A top UN official has renewed calls for a “humanitarian ceasefire” to allow aid to reach the 2.2 million people trapped in the Israel-Hamas war, saying: “We are not asking for the moon.”
Israeli troops will advance to anywhere Hamas exists, including the southern part of the Gaza Strip, Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari has said. It comes amid mounting concerns about Israeli plans to expand military operations in parts of the south where people have sought refuge from fighting. Civilians in parts of south-east Gaza were told in leaflets dropped by Israeli aircraft to move into a smaller “safe zone” in the coastal town of Mawasi, which covers just 14 sq km (5.4 sq miles), prompting warnings from the heads of 18 UN agencies and international aid groups.
At least 12,000 Palestinians, including 5,000 children, have been killed in Israeli strikes on Gaza since 7 October, according to Hamas officials on Friday.
Doctors Without Borders (MSF) said it has been trying to evacuate some of its staff and their families currently trapped inside the organisation’s facilities near al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City. Since last Saturday, MSF staff and families – 137 people, 65 of them children – have not been able to go outside because of ongoing fighting, it said.
Gaza’s main telecommunications companies, Paltel and Jawwal, have confirmed the “partial restoration” of telecom services in various parts of Gaza.
At least five Palestinians were killed and two others injured in a blast at a building in a refugee camp in the occupied West Bank city of Nablus, the Palestinian Red Crescent ambulance service said early on Saturday.
A UN human rights official has urged Israel to stop using water as a “weapon of war” and allow clean water and fuel into Gaza to restart the water supply network. Pedro Arrojo-Agudo, UN special rapporteur on water and sanitation, said consciously preventing supplies of safe water from entering Gaza “violates both international humanitarian and human rights law”. The UN says Gaza’s civilians face the “immediate possibility” of starvation.
An Israeli police investigation into the Hamas attacks at a music festival on 7 October has updated the death toll to 364, according to Israeli media reports. Earlier counts had placed the death count from the attack at Supernova music festival in Kibbutz Re’im at 270.
The Israeli military has said it has retrieved the body of a soldier, Noa Marciano, who had been held captive by Hamas in a building near Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital. It comes after the Israel Defense Forces said on Thursday they had found the body of Yehudit Weiss, one of about 240 hostages taken on 7 October, in a building near the hospital.
Bahrain’s crown prince says a “hostage trade” between Hamas and Israel could achieve a break in hostilities he believes might end the conflict in Gaza. Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa also said security in the region would not realised without a two-state solution, in which he described the US as “indispensable” in achieving.
The deputy head of Israel’s legislature has criticised the decision to allow a limited amount of fuel into Gaza for humanitarian needs. Nissim Vaturi, deputy speaker of the Knesset and a member of the ruling Likud party, said Israel was being “too humane” and that it should “burn Gaza now”.
Five countries have submitted a referral to the international criminal court (ICC) for an investigation of “the situation in the state of Palestine”, ICC chief prosecutor Karim Khan said. Khan confirmed his office was already conducting an investigation into the situation in the state of Palestine which began in March 2021.
The Vatican has confirmed that Pope Francis will meet next week with relatives of hostages held by Hamas militants in Gaza. The pope will separately meet with a delegation of Palestinians with family members in Gaza, Vatican spokesperson Matteo Bruni said.IDF evidence so far falls well short of al-Shifa hospital being Hamas HQPrior to their capture of Dar al-Shifa hospital, the Israel Defense Forces went to great lengths to depict the medical complex as a headquarters for Hamas, from where its attacks on Israel were planned.
The evidence produced so far falls well short of that. IDF videos have shown only modest collections of small arms, mostly assault rifles, recovered from the extensive medical complex.
That suggests an armed presence, but not the sort of elaborate nerve centre depicted in animated graphics presented to the media before al-Shifa was seized, portraying a network of well-equipped subterranean chambers.
Even the videos produced so far have raised questions under scrutiny. A BBC analysis found the footage of an IDF spokesperson showing the apparent discovery of a bag containing a gun behind an MRI scanning machine, had been taped hours before the arrival of the journalists to whom he was supposedly showing it.
In a video shown later, the number of guns in the bag had doubled. The IDF claimed its video of what it found at the hospital was unedited, filmed in a single take, but the BBC analysis found it had been edited.
Israeli forces say they are still carefully exploring the site. The video presentation of al-Shifa did show the main facilities lay deep underground, and it is quite possible the Israeli soldiers have not reached them yet, so there could be much more to come. But the attempt to present what has been found so far as significant is bound to fuel scepticism about whatever is presented later.
There are questions over how much of its graphic presentation of the network under al-Shifa was based on what Israel knew already; its own architect had built an extensive basement area there the last time Israel directly occupied Gaza, up to 2005.
All of this is significant under the Geneva conventions, which forbid military operations against hospitals unless “they are used to commit, outside their humanitarian duties, acts harmful to the enemy”. This exception, spelled out in article 19 of the fourth Geneva convention, states specifically: “… the presence of small arms and ammunition taken from such combatants and not yet handed to the proper service, shall not be considered to be acts harmful to the enemy”.
Israel ratified the Geneva conventions in 1951 and claims to observe the principle of proportionality under international humanitarian law, in which the direct military advantage anticipated from a military operation outweighs the civilian harm that can reasonably be anticipated as a consequence. Its observance of those principles is what is in question.
“Israel has failed to provide anywhere even close to the level of evidence required to justify the narrow exception under which hospitals can be targeted under the laws of war,” said Mai El-Sadany, a human rights lawyer and the executive director of the Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy, in Washington.
“In the rare case that protection is lifted, Israel would have to provide civilians with a meaningful chance to evacuate and even still, any civilians who remain in the hospital following an evacuation order would still be protected by the rules of proportionality,” El-Sadany added. “At every stage of this legal assessment, Israel has fallen abysmally short. It has provided photo and video footage that is far from commensurate with its initial claims.”
At some point, these issues could be submitted to formal judgment. Israel does not recognise the international criminal court, but the court recognises Palestine as a member, and has been conducting an investigation into possible war crimes and crimes against humanity in the occupied Palestinian territories since 2021.
Any such judgment would be years away. More immediately and directly, the details of the Shifa raid have an impact on the international climate in which Israel is conducting its war. Countries such as the UK, Germany and most importantly, the US, have resisted calls for a ceasefire on the grounds that Israel’s actions constitute legitimate self-defence. Every day without convincing evidence from the raid makes that argument harder to pursue.
The Biden administration has not only defended Israel’s operations but presented independent claims based on its own intelligence about the hospital. John Kirby, the White House national security spokesperson, framed the alleged Hamas facility there as a command “node” rather than a centre, and a possible weapons store.
The absence of evidence so far, is beginning to recall past US intelligence failures, most dramatically those preceding the Iraq invasion. It further isolates Washington on the world stage, and deepens already significant rifts within the administration itself.Israeli forces ‘determined to advance’, says military – as it happenedIsraeli troops will advance to anywhere Hamas exists, including the southern part of the Gaza Strip, Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari has said.
Hagari, in his regular briefing on Friday, said:
The IDF spokesperson’s comments come amid mounting concerns about Israeli plans to expand military operations in parts of the south where people have sought refuge from fighting.
Civilians in parts of south-east Gaza have been told in leaflets dropped by Israeli aircraft to move into a smaller “safe zone” in the coastal town of Mawasi, which covers just 14 sq km (5.4 sq miles).
It’s turned 7am in Gaza City and Tel Aviv and we’ll shut this blog now. Our rolling live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war will resume shortly. You can see all our coverage here.
Here’s a rundown on where things stand:
About 26 Palestinians, mostly children, were killed in an Israeli bombardment of the city of Khan Yunis in southern Gaza early on Saturday, the Palestinian news agency Wafa said.
A first consignment of fuel has entered Gaza after Israel bowed to US pressure for limited deliveries to allow wastewater treatment and the resumption of communications after a two-day blackout. Israel’s national security adviser, Tzachi Hanegbi, said on Friday the country’s war cabinet had agreed to allow two tanker trucks of fuel to enter the Gaza Strip each day, a quantity he described as “very minimal”.
The White House said fuel should be allowed into the Gaza Strip “on a regular basis and in larger quantities”, while welcoming the Israeli move.
A top UN official has renewed calls for a “humanitarian ceasefire” to allow aid to reach the 2.2 million people trapped in the Israel-Hamas war, saying: “We are not asking for the moon.”
Israel has issued a fresh warning to Palestinians in the southern city of Khan Younis to relocate west out of the line of fire and closer to humanitarian aid.
Israeli troops will advance to anywhere Hamas exists, including the southern part of the Gaza Strip, Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari has said. It comes amid mounting concerns about Israeli plans to expand military operations in parts of the south where people have sought refuge from fighting. Civilians in parts of south-east Gaza were told in leaflets dropped by Israeli aircraft to move into a smaller “safe zone” in the coastal town of Mawasi, which covers just 14 sq km (5.4 sq miles), prompting warnings from the heads of 18 UN agencies and international aid groups.
At least 12,000 Palestinians, including 5,000 children, have been killed in Israeli strikes on Gaza since 7 October, according to Hamas officials on Friday.
Doctors Without Borders (MSF) said it has been trying to evacuate some of its staff and their families currently trapped inside the organisation’s facilities near al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City. Since last Saturday, MSF staff and families – 137 people, 65 of them children – have not been able to go outside because of ongoing fighting, it said.
Gaza’s main telecommunications companies, Paltel and Jawwal, have confirmed the “partial restoration” of telecom services in various parts of Gaza.
At least five Palestinians were killed and two others injured in a blast at a building in a refugee camp in the occupied West Bank city of Nablus, the Palestinian Red Crescent ambulance service said early on Saturday.
A UN human rights official has urged Israel to stop using water as a “weapon of war” and allow clean water and fuel into Gaza to restart the water supply network. Pedro Arrojo-Agudo, UN special rapporteur on water and sanitation, said consciously preventing supplies of safe water from entering Gaza “violates both international humanitarian and human rights law”. The UN says Gaza’s civilians face the “immediate possibility” of starvation.
An Israeli police investigation into the Hamas attacks at a music festival on 7 October has updated the death toll to 364, according to Israeli media reports. Earlier counts had placed the death count from the attack at Supernova music festival in Kibbutz Re’im at 270.
The Israeli military has said it has retrieved the body of a soldier, Noa Marciano, who had been held captive by Hamas in a building near Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital. It comes after the Israel Defense Forces said on Thursday they had found the body of Yehudit Weiss, one of about 240 hostages taken on 7 October, in a building near the hospital.
Bahrain’s crown prince says a “hostage trade” between Hamas and Israel could achieve a break in hostilities he believes might end the conflict in Gaza. Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa also said security in the region would not realised without a two-state solution, in which he described the US as “indispensable” in achieving.
The deputy head of Israel’s legislature has criticised the decision to allow a limited amount of fuel into Gaza for humanitarian needs. Nissim Vaturi, deputy speaker of the Knesset and a member of the ruling Likud party, said Israel was being “too humane” and that it should “burn Gaza now”.
Five countries have submitted a referral to the international criminal court (ICC) for an investigation of “the situation in the state of Palestine”, ICC chief prosecutor Karim Khan said. Khan confirmed his office was already conducting an investigation into the situation in the state of Palestine which began in March 2021.
The Vatican has confirmed that Pope Francis will meet next week with relatives of hostages held by Hamas militants in Gaza. The pope will separately meet with a delegation of Palestinians with family members in Gaza, Vatican spokesperson Matteo Bruni said.
The director of the al-Wafa hospital in Gaza City was killed and several doctors were injured in an Israeli airstrike launched against the hospital overnight on Friday, according to the Palestinian news agency Wafa.
The director’s name was Midhad Mhaisen, according to reports.
Wafa quoted local sources as saying Israeli warplanes launched an air raid against the al-Wafa hospital and home for elderly care in the al-Zahra area.
Brunei, Indonesia and Malaysia have called for an immediate, durable and sustained humanitarian truce leading to cessation of hostilities in the Gaza Strip, Reuters reports.
The countries said they were issuing their statement to give a better and fair reflection of the discussions on the Gaza situation during a meeting of leaders from the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) in San Francisco.
Israel’s attack on Gaza’s largest hospital has sparked accusations of war crimes, but Israel says it falls within the boundaries of international law. In case you missed this earlier, we look at what humanitarian law says about hospitals, whether they can be targeted in military attacks, and what happens if a hospital loses its protected status.
A first consignment of fuel has entered Gaza after Israel bowed to US pressure for limited deliveries to allow wastewater treatment and the resumption of communications after a two-day blackout, Agence France-Press reports.
The first delivery arrived from Egypt late on Friday as Israel pressed its offensive, combing the Gaza Strip’s largest hospital, al-Shifa, for the Hamas operations centre it says lies beneath.
Israel’s war cabinet unanimously agreed on Friday to allow two fuel tankers a day “to run the wastewater treatment facilities ... which are facing collapse due to the lack of electricity”, national security adviser Tzachi Hanegbi said.
The UN agency for Palestinian refugees (UNRWA) said 70% of residents had no access to clean water in south Gaza, where raw sewage has started to flow on the streets.
Under the deal, 140,000 litres (37,000 gallons) of fuel will be allowed in every 48 hours, of which 20,000 litres will be earmarked for generators to restore the phone network, a US official said.
Communications have been down for two days after fuel ran out, and a first consignment of about 17,000 litres was earmarked for telecommunications company Paltel. The communications blackout hampered aid deliveries, UNRWA said.
About 26 Palestinians, mostly children, were killed in an Israeli bombardment of the city of Khan Yunis in southern Gaza early on Saturday, Reuters reports the Palestinian news agency Wafa as saying.
A group of pro-Palestinian protesters forced their way into a building on a University of Michigan campus in the US, police said.
Video posted on social media showed protesters on Friday pushing past police into an administration building that houses offices for the school president, Associated Press reports.
An estimated 200 people then entered the building, university deputy police chief Melissa Overton said.
Once inside, protesters chanted, called for the university to divest from Israel and waved Palestinian flags, as seen on the video.
About six police agencies, including state police, assisted campus officers. There were no reports of injuries.
Officers began removing protesters from the building on the Ann Arbor campus on Friday evening, police said.
A top United Nations official has renewed calls for a “humanitarian ceasefire” to allow aid to reach the 2.2 million people trapped in the war between Israel and Hamas, saying: “We are not asking for the moon.”
“Call it what you will, but the requirement – from a humanitarian point of view – is simple: stop the fighting to allow civilians to move safely,” the UN humanitarian chief, Martin Griffiths, said in an address to the UN general assembly on Friday.
Agence France-Presse reports that Griffiths also said:
As well, Griffiths called for the release of all hostages held in Gaza without condition.
About 240 were taken hostage and 1,200 people killed in Israel when Hamas militants carried out a cross-border attack on 7 October, Israeli officials say. In Gaza, 12,000 people have been killed in Israel’s relentless response, officials in the Hamas-run territory say.
Griffiths pleaded:
The White House has said fuel should be allowed into the Gaza Strip “on a regular basis and in larger quantities” after Israel agreed to allow in two tanker trucks’ worth a day.
Israel’s national security adviser, Tzachi Hanegbi, said on Friday that Israel’s war cabinet had agreed to allow the “very minimal” amount of fuel to enter for Gaza’s communications system and water and sewage services.
The White House said later on X (formerly Twitter) that it was “glad Israel agreed to fuel deliveries to Gaza at our strong request”.
The White House also said:
Hanegbi had said the aim of allowing in the two trucks’ worth of fuel was to prevent the spread of disease in Gaza without disrupting Israel’s ability to continue its war against Hamas.
Hanegbi said the fuel amounted to roughly 2-4% of the normal quantities of fuel that entered Gaza before the war erupted on 7 October.
Israel has issued a fresh warning to Palestinians in the southern city of Khan Younis to relocate west out of the line of fire and closer to humanitarian aid, Reuters reports.
The warning in the latest indication that the Israeli military plans to attack Hamas in southern Gaza after subduing the north.
Mark Regev, an aide to Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, told MSNBC on Friday:
Such a move could compel hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who fled south from the Israeli assault on Gaza City to relocate again, along with residents of the southern city of Khan Younis, worsening a dire humanitarian crisis.
Khan Younis has a population of more than 400,000.
Israel dropped leaflets over eastern areas of Khan Younis overnight on Thursday telling people to evacuate to shelters, suggesting military operations there were imminent.
There’s more in on the blast at a refugee camp in Nablus on the West Bank: witnesses have told Agence France-Presse that the strike appeared to have come from a drone.
There was no immediate confirmation.
At least five Palestinians were killed in the blast at a building in the camp, the Palestinian Red Crescent ambulance service has said.
The camp’s administration said an aerial strike targeted the local headquarters of the Palestinian group Fatah in the camp.
The Israeli military said it was checking on the reports.
About 24,000 people live in the Balata refugee camp, in the northern West Bank, and several Palestinian armed groups operate inside, AFP reports.
The strike comes a day after the Israeli army said it had killed at least seven militants in two separate confrontations in the West Bank.
This is Adam Fulton taking over the live blog. We’ll keep bringing you all the latest developments as they unfold
It’s just past 2am in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of the latest developments:
At least 12,000 Palestinians, including 5,000 children, have been killed in Israeli strikes on Gaza since 7 October, according to Hamas officials on Friday.
Israeli troops will advance to anywhere Hamas exists, including the southern part of the Gaza Strip, Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari has said. It comes amid mounting concerns about Israeli plans to expand military operations in parts of the south where people have sought refuge from fighting. Civilians in parts of south-east Gaza have been told in leaflets dropped by Israeli aircraft to move into a smaller “safe zone” in the coastal town of Mawasi, which covers just 14 sq km (5.4 sq miles), prompting warnings from the heads of 18 UN agencies and international aid groups.
Israel’s national security adviser has said the country’s war cabinet had agreed to allow two tanker trucks of fuel to enter the Gaza Strip each day – a quantity he described as “very minimal”. Tzachi Hanegbi said the fuel would be allowed for Gaza’s communications system and water and sewage services. An Israeli official later said there would be “no limitation” on aid requested for Gaza by the UN, an apparent concession to international pressure and warnings that its iron grip on the war-torn Palestinian territory will lead to starvation and disease.
Doctors Without Borders (MSF) said it has been trying to evacuate some of its staff and their families currently trapped inside the organisation’s facilities near al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City. Since last Saturday, MSF staff and families – 137 people, 65 of them children – have not been able to go outside because of ongoing fighting, it said.
Gaza’s main telecommunications companies Paltel and Jawwal have confirmed the “partial restoration” of telecom services in various parts of Gaza. The partial restoration comes after a limited quantity of fuel was provided through the UN agency for Palestinian refugees (UNRWA), they said.
A UN human rights official has urged Israel to stop using water as a “weapon of war” and allow clean water and fuel into Gaza to restart the water supply network. Pedro Arrojo-Agudo, UN special rapporteur on water and sanitation, reminded Israel that consciously preventing supplies of safe water from entering Gaza “violates both international humanitarian and human rights law”. The UN has warned that Gaza’s civilians face the “immediate possibility” of starvation, and that overcrowding and lack of clean water are speeding the spread of diseases as winter approaches.
At least five Palestinians were killed and two others injured in a blast at a building in a refugee camp in the occupied West Bank city of Nablus, the Palestinian Red Crescent ambulance service said early on Saturday. Meanwhile, Israeli security forces mounted a major hours-long raid in the city of Jenin beginning on Thursday night, destroying roads and killing between three and five Hamas militants in the latest instance of surging violence across the occupied West Bank. Hamas said three of its fighters had died in the raid. Israeli military officials said their forces had killed at least five militants.
An Israeli police investigation into the Hamas attacks at a music festival on 7 October has updated the death toll to 364, according to Israeli media reports. Earlier counts had placed the death count from the attack at Supernova music festival in Kibbutz Re’im at 270.
The Israeli military has said it has retrieved the body of a soldier, Noa Marciano, who had been held captive by Hamas in a building near Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital. It comes after the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said on Thursday they had found the body of Yehudit Weiss, one of about 240 hostages taken on 7 October, in a building near the hospital.
Bahrain’s crown prince says a “hostage trade” between Hamas and Israel could achieve a break in hostilities he believes might end the conflict in Gaza. Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa also said security in the region would not realised without a two-state solution, in which he described the US as “indispensable” in achieving.
The deputy head of Israel’s legislature has criticised the decision to allow a limited amount of fuel into Gaza for humanitarian needs. Nissim Vaturi, deputy speaker of the Knesset and a member of the ruling Likud party, said Israel is being “too humane” and that it should “burn Gaza now”.
Five countries have submitted a referral to the international criminal court (ICC) for an investigation of “the situation in the state of Palestine”, ICC chief prosecutor Karim Khan said. Khan confirmed his office was already conducting an investigation into the situation in the state of Palestine which began in March 2021.
The Vatican has confirmed that Pope Francis will meet next week with relatives of hostages held by Hamas militants in Gaza. The pope will separately meet with a delegation of Palestinians with family members in Gaza, Vatican spokesperson Matteo Bruni said.
At least five Palestinians were killed in a blast at a building in a refugee camp in the occupied West Bank city of Nablus, the Palestinian Red Crescent ambulance service has said.
Two others were injured in the incident, it said.
The Israeli military did not immediately provide comment on the incident.Philippines earthquake: authorities report deaths from falling debrisThe death toll from a strong earthquake off the southern Philippines rose to five on Saturday as authorities reported more casualties across two provinces.
The 6.7-magnitude quake that struck the Mindanao region mid-afternoon on Friday caused part of a shopping mall ceiling to collapse, triggered power cuts and sent people fleeing into the streets.
Falling debris from the mall in General Santos City crushed a woman to death, while 19 other people were treated for shock, city police captain Ari Noel Cardos said.
Police earlier reported the death of a couple pinned under a collapsing concrete wall in General Santos, where about 30 students were also treated for breathing difficulties.
Another person was killed by a falling steel structure in the municipality of Glan, in Sarangani province, said police officer Paul Mesalido.
Glan police were dispatched on Saturday to check on a reported landslide in a nearby village, Mesalido added.
In neighbouring Davao Occidental province, an elderly man was struck dead by a large rock that rolled down a hill near his house, said police officer Patrick Laurente.
The state seismology service said the quake was likely generated by the movement of the Earth’s crust along the Cotabato trench, a long, narrow depression on the seafloor that forms the boundary of one tectonic plate pushing against another.
Quakes are a frequent occurrence in the Philippines, which sits along the an arc of seismic and volcanic activity that stretches from Japan through south-east Asia and across the Pacific basin.
Most are too weak to be felt, but strong and destructive ones can come at random.What happened in the Russia-Ukraine war this week? Catch up with the must-read news and analysisEvery week we wrap up essential coverage of the war in Ukraine, from news and features to analysis, opinion and more.
In a field hospital, a badly wounded Ukrainian soldier had just arrived, hit with shrapnel from an enemy mortar. He looked more dead than alive. Doctors gave emergency transfusions of blood and plasma. A paramedic cut away his uniform. Another bandaged his left leg. A third gave him a shot of fentanyl, a powerful painkiller. A heart monitor beeped while artillery whumped 5km away.
After 20 minutes, the wounded man’s condition stabilised and he began to groan: a good sign. From the makeshift medical centre he was taken by ambulance to a fully equipped hospital – a perilous journey under threat of Russian shelling.
Dr Denys Sholom – the head of the medical team – said he was used to the daily carnage. He and his medical staff survive by guzzling energy drinks and puffing cigarettes during lulls in the fighting. How did he cope with constant presence of death? “The devil knows. It’s OK,” he said. Ivan, a 30-year-old doctor, said there was little prospect the conflict would stop. “I would like it to end. But I don’t think it’s going to happen.”
Morale among Ukrainian soldiers appears high. On a break from fighting near Bakhmut Serhiy Kraynyak – a member of the 5th brigade – said neither side was close to victory. “They have not completely lost the war. We have not completely won it,” he told Luke Harding.
Ukrainian troops have established a foothold on the eastern bank of the Dnipro River, officials from Russia and Ukraine acknowledged this week, Andrew Roth reported, in an operation that Kyiv says will open new avenues of attack toward Crimea.
“Against all odds, Ukraine’s defence forces have gained a foothold on the left [east] bank of the Dnipro,” said Andriy Yermak, the head of Ukraine’s presidential administration.
Russian troops abandoned the western bank of the Dnipro River a year ago and took up positions on the eastern side, from which they have been regularly shelling towns and villages opposite.
A report in the Wall Street Journal on Wednesday said Ukrainian marines had reinforced positions in three villages, brought in vehicles, and cut off a Russian resupply route – though the Ukrainians described themselves as “hunkered down in basements and trenches and heavily outnumbered”.
Sam Cranny-Evans, an associate fellow at the Royal United Services Institute, said the advance might “buy some breathing space” for the Ukrainians.
“The Russians appear to be gaining momentum in other areas such as Avdiivka … At this stage, I think it is more of an opportunistic effort designed to shape the battlefield for future operations and restore some offensive prestige,” he said.
David Cameron travelled to Kyiv and Odesa for his first trip as UK foreign secretary in an unannounced visit just days after his surprise appointment, but did not make any significant announcement about fresh military aid.
Shaun Walker and Dan Sabbagh reported that as he met Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Thursday, Cameron pledged that long-term British support for Ukraine would continue.
“What I wanted to say by being here is that we will continue to give you the moral support, the diplomatic support, the economic support but above all the military support that you need, not just this year and next year but for as long as it takes,” said Cameron.
Concern has grown in Ukraine about global support, with conflict in the Middle East taking attention away from the country, and longer-term questions about western financial backing as the US heads into an election cycle.
“Now, you know, the world is not focused on the situation on our battlefield in Ukraine, and is divided for focus,” said Zelenskiy. “It really doesn’t help, and we are thankful that UK has always supported Ukraine.”
Mariupol Women’s football players huddle around their phones and try to work out how long the delay will last. “A MiG-31 took off, that’ll be about an hour,” reckons one voice, but nobody can ever know for sure.
Ten minutes ago they were holding their own against EMC-Podillya when the air raid siren sounded. Now they are sitting in an air raid shelter 500 metres around the corner. Karyna Kulakovskaya and Yana Vynorukova offer instructions to their squad. “They’ve got one player who can affect things, but if you switch her off that’s it,” Vynorukova says. “We’re going to come back fully rested, stretched and prepared, and we’re going to change the game.”
Keeping everyone warmed up and mentally engaged will be crucial if this pause, the third to have affected Mariupol this season, is prolonged. Seven hours ago, at 6am, they had gathered outside a supermarket in Kyiv’s outskirts for the four-hour drive south-west to Vinnytsia. “Imagine you’re seasonal workers going to pick strawberries,” Vynorukova had joked.
Two hours and 41 minutes after they were called inside, play restarts. The outcome? Read to the end of this Nick Ames match report with a difference.
Ukraine’s counteroffensive has stalled, with progress on the two principal axes on the southern front modest since it began on 4 June, Dan Sabbagh assessed. Some blame western politicians for taking so long to supply tanks, long-range missiles and F-16 fighters to Ukraine.
“We gave Russians so much time to put in their defences,” says Ben Hodges, a former commanding general of the US army in Europe. The word “stalemate” is used but the situation on the frontline is more dynamic. Russia continues to mount repeated, unsophisticated, attacks, now centred on Avdiivka. Moscow retains a substantial advantage in personnel while incurring heavy casualties. It has been able to produce and source large amounts of artillery ammunition.
However, Russian logistics – with depots successfully targeted by the Ukrainians with long-range Storm Shadow and ATACMS missiles – are uneven. The war is likely to remain finely balanced – although not stalemated – with both sides chasing a technological or political breakthrough.
A former Russian detective who was convicted for his role in the 2006 killing of the investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaya has been pardoned by President Vladimir Putin after fighting in Ukraine, Pjotr Sauer reported.
Sergei Khadzhikurbanov was given a 20-year prison sentence in 2014 for his role in organising the murder of Politkovskaya, a prominent reporter at the liberal newspaper Novaya Gazeta who was shot dead in 2006 in the lift of her Moscow apartment block.
Khadzhikurbanov’s lawyer, Alexei Mikhalchik, told Russian media on Tuesday that his client received a presidential pardon after completing a six-month military contract in Ukraine and had since remained in the armed forces.
In a joint statement with Novaya Gazeta, Politkovskaya’s two children Vera and Ilya said: “For us, this ‘pardon’ is not evidence of atonement and repentance of the killer. This is a monstrous fact of injustice […] Desecration of the memory of a person killed for her beliefs and professional duty.”
Khadzhikurbanov was one of five people jailed over the murder of Politkovskaya, a fierce Kremlin critic who had extensively covered Russia’s wars in Chechnya. Russia’s defence ministry and the Wagner mercenary group have recruited tens of thousands of prisoners, including murderers and domestic abusers, to fight in the war in Ukraine.
On 23 February 2022, on the eve of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Yaroslav Pilunskiy was working in Rome, colour-editing a film with a big international team. His only contact with drones, at that point, had been flying a simple model to scout movie locations. Now he is a crack military drone operator for the armed forces of Ukraine, Charlotte Higgins wrote.
Recently, Pilunskiy has been joined in the drone unit by Ivan Bannikov, one of Ukraine’s most respected film editors and fellow member of a film collective called Babylon 13. Before the invasion, Bannikov says, “I was making films, trying to enjoy life, being with my family. I never dreamed there were creatures in the world capable of doing what the Russians have done.
“When you look at the enemy on the screen, it reminds you of when you are planning a scene at the editing desk – looking for the shot, then the reaction. It’s the same here, you are looking for the right angle.”
Pilunskiy says that sometimes, if the situation allows on Ukraine’s brutal eastern frontline, he will fly his drone to “a place I know where the Russians are constantly shelling over a lake, against a beautiful sunset.”Russia-Ukraine war at a glance: what we know on day 633Ukraine and the US will hold a military industry conference in Washington on 6-7 December, officials from both countries have said. Ukraine is ramping up production of its own weapons and seeking joint ventures with international armament producers. Ukraine has set up a joint venture with Rheinmetall of Germany to service and repair western weapons, and in September hosted a forum with more than 250 western arms producers.
Ukraine has said it has carried out “successful actions” on the eastern bank of the Dnipro River. It comes after Ukraine and Russia acknowledged earlier this week that Ukraine had established positions on the eastern side of the river, which marks part of the frontline in south-east Ukraine.
Celebrating the development, Volodymyr Zelenskiy published pictures showing Ukrainian soldiers on the eastern bank of the river. “Left bank of Kherson. Our warriors. Thank you for your strength and for moving forward!” Ukraine’s president said. “Glory to each and everyone who is returning freedom and justice to Ukraine!”
A total of 4.4m tonnes of cargo, including 3.2m tonnes of grain, has been shipped via Ukraine’s new Black Sea shipping corridor since it was established in August, according to a report by the Interfax-Ukraine agency. A UN-brokered deal that had allowed Ukrainian exports to pass through the Black Sea fell through in July after Russia withdrew, prompting Ukraine to announce a “humanitarian corridor” hugging the sea’s western coast.
Thousands of people living near the frontlines in southern and eastern Ukraine were left without power after Russian strikes on energy facilities, the Ukrainian government said. Last winter, systematic targeting of Ukraine’s energy infrastructure by Russia left millions without light or heating. Zelenskiy said this week that western support had allowed Ukraine to improve its air defences ahead of the coming winter months.
At least nine people were killed in Russian shelling of the southern Ukrainian city of Kherson, according to local officials. Oleksandr Prokudin, head of the Kherson regional military administration, said shelling on Thursday had targeted residential areas, shopping districts and administrative buildings. Another two people were killed in the eastern region of Donetsk, according to the acting head of its military administration.
Russian casualties since the start of the war now stand at 316,760, according to the Ukrainian military.
Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said he has “no doubt” Vladimir Putin will still be Russian president after the election in March. Putin has not yet announced his intention to run but is widely expected to stand for another six-year term. Asked in an interview with student journalists what the next president should be like, Peskov said: “The same.”
The British foreign secretary, David Cameron, followed his trip to Ukraine on Thursday with a visit to neighbouring Moldova. The Moldovan president, Maia Sandu, posted a photo of her and Cameron together to social media and said the two had met on Thursday night to discuss “Black Sea security, bilateral cooperation and our united stance against corruption”.
The Dutch government has announced it has earmarked an additional €2bn in military aid for Ukraine in 2024. It is part of a wider package that includes an initial €102m (£89m/$111m) for reconstruction and humanitarian aid that will be increased during the year if needed.Ukrainian military reports ‘successful operations’ on Dnipro River’s east bankUkrainian troops have conducted a series of successful operations on the eastern bank of the Dnipro River, the country’s military has said.
The claim on Friday comes after official acknowledgment from Russia and Ukraine earlier this week that Ukraine had established positions on the eastern side of the river, which marks the frontline for a stretch of territory in south-east Ukraine.
“The defence forces of Ukraine conducted a series of successful operations on the left bank of the Dnipro River, along the Kherson front,” the Ukraine Marine Corps said in a statement on social media.
Ukraine liberated Kherson and areas around the city on the western bank of the river a year ago, after Russia executed a humiliating withdrawal weeks after Vladimir Putin had declared the region to be part of Russia.
Ukraine had hoped to push forward and retake more territory over the summer and autumn but Kyiv’s much-trailed counteroffensive has struggled, after Russia constructed formidable minefields and other defences along the frontline.
The news of the troops on the eastern bank of the Dnipro provides some good news for Kyiv at a time when Russia is on the offensive along other parts of the front.
The Ukrainian hope is that establishing positions on the eastern side of the river could allow it to push on towards Crimea, which Russia annexed in 2014.
Pushing the Russians further back from the riverbank would also bring some respite to the communities on the other side, which have come under constant attack in recent months. Russian forces have been bombarding towns and villages on the western bank with artillery from their positions, including the city of Kherson, which is attacked on a near daily basis.
“One of the main goals of this combat work is to push the enemy as far as possible from the right bank to protect the Ukrainian civilian population, in particular Kherson, from constant Russian shelling,” Andriy Kovalyov, a spokesperson for Ukraine’s general staff, said in comments posted to a military channel on YouTube.
On Friday the Kherson regional governor said another night of artillery attacks had killed one civilian. The previous day, at least three people were killed and a dozen injured in shelling.
Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said another goal was to make it easier for Ukraine to target Russian military and logistics infrastructure in occupied Crimea.
“These operations are taking place as part of the strategic task of bringing Crimea within our firing range … The closer we get, the more things we can use, not only long-distance missiles and drones but also artillery,” Podolyak said in an interview in Kyiv.
Claims of the Ukrainian positions on the eastern bank have been relayed by Russian military bloggers for weeks, but Kyiv declined to comment officially until this week. Zelenskiy posted photographs of Ukrainian soldiers in speedboats on the Dnipro to his Telegram channel on Friday. He wrote: “Our warriors. Thank you for your strength, for moving forward!”
On Tuesday, Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, Andriy Yermak, announced for the first time that Ukrainian troops had “gained a foothold” on the eastern bank. Vladimir Saldo, the Kremlin-installed official in charge of occupied Kherson, claimed Ukrainian troops were “blocked” in Krynky, a small village on the eastern side of the river. He said the troops were facing a “fiery hell” from Russian artillery and drones.
“Russia used everything and anything to push our forces out – all kinds of weapons,” said Ivan Stupak, a Kyiv-based military analyst. He said Ukrainian authorities had previously kept quiet about the positions because the situation remained precarious.
“The fact they are now talking about it openly suggests our forces have really dug in,” he said. There are reports that three separate groups were able to link up on the eastern side of the river.
Russia is now on the offensive in some places, notably around the town of Avdiivka, close to occupied Donetsk. Vitaliy Barabash, the head of Avdiivka’s military administration, said on Ukrainian television that Russian forces had brought in reinforcements and were making a push towards the town’s industrial zone.
With Russia and Ukraine struggling to make significant territorial gains, Gen Valery Zaluzhny, the commander-in-chief of Ukraine’s forces, said in a recent interview with the Economist that the conflict had reached a “stalemate”, something Zelenskiy later denied.
However, the mood in Ukraine has soured somewhat since the summer, as exhausted troops and the civilian population prepare for another winter in which Russia is expected to target critical infrastructure.
The international climate has also started to look less favourable for Kyiv, with much global attention shifted to the Middle East and increasingly loud voices in the US Republican party pushing for an end to financial and military aid to Ukraine.
Yermak made a trip to Washington earlier this week, meeting the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and senators from both parties in the hope of keeping Ukraine on the agenda.
Also this week, the newly appointed British foreign secretary, David Cameron, used his first foreign visit in the role to travel to Kyiv and reaffirm British support for Ukraine.
“We will continue to give you the moral support, the diplomatic support, the economic support but above all the military support that you need, not just this year and next year but for as long as it takes,” Cameron told Zelenskiy.Ukrainian teenagers win peace prize for developing apps to help young refugeesThree Ukrainian teenagers who developed apps for children who have fled war have been awarded this year’s International Children’s Peace prize at a ceremony in London.
Sofia Tereshchenko, 18, Anastasiia Feskova, 17, and Anastasiia Demchenko, 17, were awarded the prize for developing a pair of apps for refugee children.
Inspired by a news report of a lone child crying while crossing the Ukraine-Poland border, the trio met online and developed one app for young children who have fled their country, to help them understand where they are and how to seek help, and another for older children on how to integrate into the countries they successfully sought refuge in.
The awards were held in the UK for the first time on Friday. Speaking at a ceremony held in the Palace of Whitehall, Mpho Tutu, the daughter of Desmond Tutu, said: “The children are speaking. No, they are screaming.”
Tereshchenko fled Ukraine with her mother and relocated to Ely, Cambridgeshire, UK. Her father and brother still remain in Ukraine. She said the family were always tight-knit and that being separated was “heartbreaking”.
Aaron Scarth, 16, from Liverpool, UK, was nominated for his work advocating on behalf of the children of imprisoned parents. In 2018, he helped rewrite the Council of Europe recommendations about the children of imprisoned parents, ensuring it was available in child-friendly language and was the lead consultant for the development of a child impact toolkit for the children of prisoners.
Speaking at the ceremony, he said: “Whatever our parents did and didn’t do, this does not define us.”
Scarth’s father was jailed when he was nine, an experience he described as akin to “grieving someone”. “My dad wasn’t around when I was younger so I had to learn things that other males may have been taught by myself or [from] my mother,” he said.
Sri Nihal Tammana, 14 from New Jersey, US, was nominated for his environmental campaigning. He founded the charity Recycle My Battery, which facilitates the proper recycling of batteries. Since 2019, his efforts have already led to the collection and recycling of over 250,000 batteries.
The International Children’s Peace prize was first awarded in 2005. In 2013, Malala Yousafzai was awarded the prize, having being nominated the year prior. She went on to win the Nobel prize in 2014. In 2019, Greta Thunburg was awarded the prize for her climate activism.
Accepting the prize in person, Feskova said: “It’s time for the adults to take responsibility for their actions that affect children.”
“As much as we want all children to have a safe and peaceful childhood. We understand that reality is different.”
“We hope to create a better future for children, no matter who they are and where they are from. We need your support to turn this into reality. We need all of you to be open to interact[ing] with children from different backgrounds, children who are living in an entirely alien environment through no fault of theirs,” she added.Israel kills Hamas militants in Jenin raid as violence surges in West BankIsraeli security forces have mounted a major raid in the city of Jenin, destroying roads and killing between three and five Hamas militants in the latest instance of surging violence across the occupied West Bank.
Hamas said three of its fighters died in the overnight raid, which began late on Thursday night and lasted about eight hours. Israeli military officials said their forces had killed at least five.
The raid underlined the high tensions in the West Bank since the attacks launched by Hamas into southern Israel last month that prompted a massive Israeli military offensive into Gaza.
The mounting death toll in the West Bank has underscored fears that the territory seized by Israel in the 1967 war could spiral out of control amid the conflict in Gaza.
Hamas’s al-Quds Brigades in Jenin said in a statement on Friday they had engaged Israeli forces for several hours, unleashing a “torrent of fire” and laying ambushes with explosives.
An Israeli military spokesperson said an armed “terrorist cell that fired at Israeli security forces” was struck by an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) aircraft.
“Additional terrorists who fired and hurled explosive devices at the security forces were neutralised,” the spokesperson said.
The Israeli military said some Hamas militants fled in vehicles and ambulances toward Jenin’s Ibn Sina hospital, and that troops stopped one of the vehicles at the entrance to the hospital. It released video footage of soldiers searching a car at the hospital and finding M-16 rifles and ammunition.
Palestinian health officials said some hospital workers were ordered to exit the hospital, with a verified video showing them walking out of the building, holding up their hands. The Palestinian Red Crescent Society accused the IDF of detaining and searching ambulance crews.
Last week, Israeli forces raided Jenin and fought for hours with gunmen in a battle in which 14 people were killed, one of the heaviest clashes in the occupied West Bank in months.
At least 191 Palestinians have been killed in the West Bank since the 7 October Hamas attacks on Israel, and as many as 2,000 detained amid a strict clampdown. Israeli officials say the arrests have thwarted several significant attacks.
Last month’s attacks by Hamas killed 1,200, mostly civilians, with more than 240 taken hostage. Palestinian civilians have borne the brunt of Israel’s weeks-long military campaign in Gaza.
Gaza health authorities say at least 11,500 people have been confirmed killed in an Israeli bombardment and ground invasion – more than 4,700 of them children.
A senior Israeli military officer told the Guardian last week that the West Bank was a “broad front” where the Israeli army was already deploying significant forces against Hamas and would not hesitate to intensify its efforts if necessary.
Israeli security forces also shot dead an attacker near Hebron after he opened fire on soldiers on Friday morning. On Thursday, an Israeli soldier was killed at a checkpoint on the West Bank’s route 60.
Itamar Ben-Gvir, Israel’s national security minister, said Israel needed to deal with Hamas in the West Bank “exactly like we are dealing with Gaza”.
Ben-Gvir, the leader of the far-right party Jewish Power, also said the Palestinian Authority “has similar views to Hamas and its heads identify with Hamas’s massacre” and should be dealt with in the same way.OpenAI fires co-founder and CEO Sam Altman for allegedly lying to company boardSam Altman, the chief executive and co-founder of OpenAI, has been ousted from his own company after its board accused him of “being not consistently candid in his communications”.
Altman’s dismissal is a major shakeup in Silicon Valley. Following the launch of ChatGPT, the wildly popular chatbot developed by OpenAI, Altman became one of the world’s most visible tech executives and a sought-after expert on artificial intelligence.
In a statement on Friday, Open AI’s board “no longer has confidence in his ability to lead” and said new leadership is “necessary” as the company moves forward, said a statement posted on its website. He is likewise leaving the company’s board.
“Mr. Altman’s departure follows a deliberative review process by the board, which concluded that he was not consistently candid in his communications with the board, hindering its ability to exercise its responsibilities,” the board’s statement said. What Altman had allegedly hidden from his company’s board was not clear.
Altman tweeted a sunny message after the combative announcement.
“I loved my time at openai. it was transformative for me personally, and hopefully the world a little bit. most of all i loved working with such talented people. will have more to say about what’s next later,” he wrote.
Mira Murati, OpenAI’s CTO, will become interim CEO in his place, according to the statement. Murati has been a part of the San Francisco-based company’s leadership for five years. Greg Brockman will step down from his role as the chair of the board but will retain his other position as OpenAI president, according to the statement.
Brockman announced his departure on social media on Friday. “Based on today’s news, I quit,” he wrote.
The announcement blindsided employees, many of whom learned of the sudden ouster from an internal announcement and the company’s public facing blog. OpenAI scheduled an emergency all-hands meeting on Friday afternoon to discuss the news with employees, a person familiar with the matter told Reuters.
Altman has been regarded as the leading voice in the AI field since his company released ChatGPT in November 2022. The generative AI chatbot accrued more than 100 million users in less than a year.
The 38-year-old has led efforts to create “artificial general intelligence”, or AGI, an AI system capable of completing any task a human can achieve.
Altman helped found the company in 2015, initially as a non-profit with a $1bn endowment from high-profile backers including Elon Musk, Peter Thiel and LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman. Altman and Musk served as co-chairs with a goal “to advance digital intelligence in the way that is most likely to benefit humanity as a whole, unconstrained by a need to generate financial return”. In 2019, however, OpenAI reshaped itself around a “capped profit” model with Altman as the CEO.
After releasing ChatGPT last year, Altman was thrust into the spotlight. He has been among the most vocal proponents of artificial intelligence, but has also led calls for regulation and warned that the technology comes with risks as it reshapes society. He testified before the US Congress in May about what form AI legislation should take.
Altman has long been viewed as a Silicon Valley wunderkind. In the tradition of other tech founders before him, Altman dropped out of Stanford in 2005 to launch his social-networking app, Loopt, which he later sold for $43m. He was recruited in 2014 to serve as the president of the startup accelerator Y Combinator but left in 2020 to focus on OpenAI.
The launch of ChatGPT elevated his profile significantly – he has been called the father of ChatGPT and the “Oppenheimer of our age”. Earlier this year he traveled on a 22-country tour in which he met with world leaders, including Rishi Sunak, Emmanuel Macron and Narendra Modi, among others.
Just one day before his firing, he spoke at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation conference in San Francisco where he argued that AI will be “the greatest leap forward of any of the big technological revolutions we’ve had so far”.
He also acknowledged the need for guardrails.
“I really think the world is going to rise to the occasion and everybody wants to do the right thing,” Altman said.
Stocks for Microsoft, a key business partner of OpenAI that announced this year it planned to invest billions in the company, further fell on Friday after news broke of Altman’s departure. Microsoft said the shakeup will not affect its relationship with OpenAI.
At an emergency all-hands meeting on Friday afternoon after the announcement, Murati sought to calm employees and said OpenAI’s partnership with Microsoft is stable and its backer’s executives, including CEO Satya Nadella, continue to express confidence in the startup, a person familiar with the matter told Reuters.
The Information previously reported details of the meeting.
“Microsoft remains committed to Mira and their team as we bring this next era of AI to our customers,” a spokesperson for the software maker told Reuters on Friday.
In a statement published on Microsoft’s website, Nadella added: “We have a long-term agreement with OpenAI ... Together, we will continue to deliver the meaningful benefits of this technology to the world.”
The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this reportApple, Disney and IBM to pause ads on X after antisemitic Elon Musk tweetApple will pause all its advertising on X, formerly Twitter, two days after owner Elon Musk tweeted his enthusiastic agreement with an antisemitic post.
A cascade of other major technology and media companies, from IBM to Disney, made similar announcements on Friday.
Apple’s ads had run beside tweets praising Adolf Hitler and the Nazis, according to a report released earlier in the week. Film studio Lionsgate said it would also pause ads on X, as did Warner Bros, Paramount, Sony Pictures, and Comcast/NBCUniversal, according to media reports. IBM made a similar move the night prior. The New York Times reported Disney would be pausing spending on the social media platform as well.
The billionaire CEO of Tesla and SpaceX wrote Wednesday that a tweet accusing Jews of hating white people was “the actual truth”. The White House condemned Musk’s statements Friday morning, lambasting them as “abhorrent”. A coalition of more than 150 rabbis had called for Apple, Disney, Amazon, Oracle and others to stop advertising on the social network in response to Musk’s tweets.
The iPhone maker had been one of the social network’s biggest advertisers, spending as much as $100m a year there as of November 2022 when Musk purchased it, according to Bloomberg. The company said it had “mostly stopped” advertising on X in December 2022, though ad analytics data told a different financial story. Since then, Twitter’s business has been in free fall, with advertisers fleeing, regulators circling, user numbers sinking and staff at less than 50% of pre-Musk levels. Researchers have documented a disturbing rise in antisemitic and racist posts on the social network in the aftermath of his disastrous acquisition as well.
Musk picked a fight with Apple in December 2022 as the company decreased its advertising, wondering online whether CEO Tim Cook and his employees “hate free speech in America”. He tweeted a meme about “going to war” with Apple at the time but deleted it. Cook invited Musk to Apple’s corporate headquarters not long after, and the two seemed to reach a detente.
IBM, also one of X’s biggest advertisers, announced it would stop advertising on X Thursday. The company made the decision in response to a report by liberal watchdog Media Matters that found both IBM and Apple’s ads running alongside hate speech. Musk called Media Matters an “evil organization” in response.
“IBM has zero tolerance for hate speech and discrimination and we have immediately suspended all advertising on X while we investigate this entirely unacceptable situation,” a company spokesperson told the Guardian.
Linda Yaccarino, the CEO of X, and former advertising sales chief at NBC Universal, attempted to do damage control for her boss Thursday, writing, “X’s point of view has always been very clear that discrimination by everyone should STOP across the board.” She did not use Musk’s name or mention his tweets, however.Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs and singer Cassie settle abuse lawsuit one day after filingSean “Diddy” Combs and singer Cassie said on Friday that they have settled a lawsuit containing allegations of beatings and abuse by the music producer.
Combs, a hip-hop icon and the founder of Bad Boy Records, was accused of rape and abuse in a major lawsuit filed by Cassie, whose legal name is Casandra Ventura, that alleges he used his powerful network to keep her trapped in a violent relationship with him.
The settlement, one day after the lawsuit was filed, was announced in a release sent by attorney Douglas Wigdor, representing Ventura.
In his statement, Wigdor said: “I am very proud of Ms Ventura for having the strength to go public with her lawsuit. She ought to be commended for doing so.”
Ben Brafman, an attorney for Combs, did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment. On Thursday, he said Combs “vehemently denies” the allegations.
The release said they had reached a deal to their “mutual satisfaction” on Friday evening but no terms of the agreement were disclosed.
In a statement reported by NBC News on Friday, Cassie said, “I have decided to resolve this matter amicably on terms that I have some level of control. I want to thank my family, fans and lawyers for their unwavering support.”
In a separate statement, Combs said, “We have decided to resolve this matter amicably. I wish Cassie and her family all the best,” before adding, “Love.”
The two met around 2005 when she was 19 and he was 37. Combs signed Ventura to his Bad Boy Records label with a 10-album deal.
They dated for more than a decade. She alleges that over the course of their relationship, Combs assaulted her multiple times – viciously beating and raping her – and controlled every aspect of her life, the New York Times first reported on Thursday. She faced “a cycle of abuse, violence, and sex trafficking” until their relationship ended in 2018, according to the lawsuit.
A representative for Combs denied the claims, calling the allegations “offensive and outrageous” after Ventura demanded $30m from the mogul.
Sign up to First Thing
Our US morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
A lawyer for Ventura told the New York Times that she was offered “eight figures to silence her and prevent the filing of this lawsuit”, which she rejected.
The lawsuit alleged the now 54-year-old Combs was allegedly prone to “uncontrollable rage” and forced Ventura to regularly “engage in sex acts with male sex workers” that he photographed and filmed. She was given drugs before and during, allowing her to “disassociate during these horrific encounters”, according to the suit. Ventura was a victim of sex trafficking as she was required to engage in forced sexual acts in multiple cities, the lawsuit states.
According to the lawsuit, as Ventura was trying to end the relationship in 2018, Combs forced himself into her Los Angeles home and raped her.
“Her volatile and abusive partner – who also owned her label and therefore held her future success in his hands – had fully exerted control over every aspect of her life,” the lawsuit stated.
She said in a statement to the Times that after “years in silence and darkness”, she was “finally ready to tell my story, and to speak up on behalf of myself and for the benefit of other women who face violence and abuse in their relationships”.Australian naval divers injured after being subjected to Chinese warship’s sonar pulsesAustralian naval divers have been injured after an “unsafe and unprofessional” run-in with a Chinese warship.
The acting prime minister, Richard Marles, on Saturday said the Australian government had expressed “serious concerns” to Chinese officials after the HMAS Toowoomba encountered a People’s Liberation Army-Navy destroyer on Tuesday.
The Toowoomba was in international waters in Japan’s exclusive economic zone, having worked to enforce United Nations sanctions, and was on its way to a scheduled port visit when fishing nets became entangled around its propellers.
Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup
The ship stopped so naval divers could clear the nets and its crew communicated what it was doing through the usual maritime channels, Marles said in a statement.
While the diving operation took place, the Chinese PLA-N destroyer DDG-139 came towards the Toowoomba, prompting its crew to reiterate a dive was under way and ask for the warship to stay clear.
The Chinese vessel acknowledged the message but came even closer, and was soon after detected operating its hull-mounted sonar, posing a risk to the Australian divers’ safety, Marles said.
The divers, who were assessed after they surfaced, sustained minor injuries likely because they were subjected to the sonar pulses, he said.
“This is unsafe and unprofessional conduct,” Marles said. “The safety and wellbeing of our [Australian Defence Force] personnel continues to be our utmost priority.
“Australia expects all countries, including China, to operate their militaries in a professional and safe manner.”
The defence force has for decades undertaken surveillance in the region and does so in accordance with international law, Marles said.
Divers exposed to high levels of underwater sound can suffer from dizziness, hearing damage or injuries to other organs, depending on the frequency and intensity of the sound, according to the UK’s Diving Medical Advisory Committee.
The incident comes as relations stabilise between Australia and China after recent meetings between Anthony Albanese and Xi Jinping and China’s easing of punitive trade sanctions on Australian exports.
Sign up to Morning Mail
Our Australian morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
On Saturday, Albanese said he witnessed US president Joe Biden involved in a “warm discussion” with Xi during the APEC summit in San Francisco.
Biden described his Chinese counterpart as a dictator when responding to media questions.
“It is always good when dialogue occurs, and dialogue between the United States and China is very positive,” Albanese said.
“It was a warm discussion that I witnessed, and it was very positive. The agreement on military to military communications is positive.”
Biden announced earlier this week that military-to-military contacts would resume between the two countries.
“That’s how accidents happen: misunderstandings. So we’re back to direct, open, clear communications on a direct basis,” Biden said.Too many taking sides in this conflict miss the true nature of Hamas – and NetanyahuKnow thine enemy – and know thine ally, too. Too many of those pushing for one outcome or another in the war between Israel and Hamas misjudge the parties involved. They make mistaken assumptions about one side or the other – or both – that lead them to draw flawed, even dangerous, conclusions. There is no monopoly on these mistaken assumptions. They can be made by those calling on western leaders to demand an immediate ceasefire – and by the very western leaders they seek to persuade.
Start with those who look at the havoc wreaked in Gaza – at the many thousands killed, at the pile of rubble that was once the largest Palestinian city in the world – and decide that, whatever horrors Hamas committed on 7 October, surely it has now sustained enough of a blow; given all that Gaza has suffered, surely now Hamas will be deterred from future attacks. Such thinking fundamentally misunderstands the nature of that organisation. Because Hamas is a different kind of enemy, one that does not fit the usual theories of war. Put simply, it does not mind if its own people die.
Recall how counter-terrorist strategists had to rethink all that they knew when first confronted with suicide bombers. It’s hard to deter a terrorist who does not fear death. That’s true writ large for an organisation that has explicitly said it is “proud to sacrifice martyrs”. Not its own leaders, mind, many of whom live in safety and, reportedly, great luxury in Qatar and elsewhere. But the ordinary men and women of Gaza.
This is why Hamas has spent hundreds of millions of dollars – much of it international aid money – not on basic services for Gazans, but on building and equipping a network of underground tunnels that, again, it has explicitly said are exclusively for its own use. As one Hamas leader put it, ordinary people in Gaza who need protection should look to the UN.
It’s this that explains why, whatever truth eventually emerges about the recent role of the al-Shifa hospital, a former director of a major aid organisation operating in Gaza testified this week that “it was broadly suspected/understood as far back as 2014 that Hamas used the al-Shifa hospital complex as a command centre and base for operations” – just as it has long been understood that Hamas is not afraid to use schools or UN buildings when it comes to raining rockets down on Israel. The calculation for Hamas is that either Israel hits back, killing innocents – thereby losing legitimacy in the eyes of the world – or it does not, thereby allowing Hamas to keep firing. Either way, Hamas wins.
The ideology of violent jihadism plays a part here, and that too is often overlooked. There are plenty in the west eager to see Hamas simply as a resistance movement, in the noble tradition of national liberation struggles. But this fails to reckon with Hamas’s doctrinal commitment. Violent jihadism is not a rhetorical pose: it is Hamas’s animating creed. It truly believes that when one of its own people dies – even a child killed in an airstrike – they go straight to paradise as a martyr.
Against an enemy that thinks this way, the usual pressures don’t work. If you doubt the devotion, force yourself to listen to the phone call made by one of the Hamas murderers of 7 October to his parents back in Gaza. Hear his pride, his ecstatic joy, as he tells them he has “killed Jews” with his own hands, including a husband and wife and eight others. “Dad, 10 with my own hands!”
It is not easy to imagine an accommodation with such an adversary, certainly not one of the kind that Benjamin Netanyahu so disastrously maintained for the last 15 years. The Israeli prime minister pursued a policy of containment, described aptly by the historian Yuval Noah Harari as “violent coexistence”, in which Israel believed it could just about live with Hamas in Gaza, with periodic military confrontations. That delusion was shattered on the black sabbath of last month.
Which is why the US, the European Union and other allies have reached the same conclusion as the Israeli government: that Hamas cannot merely be temporarily deterred, that this cannot simply be one more round that follows the all-too-familiar pattern in which a ceasefire is followed by a pause, allowing Hamas to regroup and rearm, ready for the next escalation. Instead, as the EU foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, told the Israeli newspaper Haaretz on Thursday, Hamas “must be defeated”.
Note, though, that it’s not just western governments that think this way. The dog that didn’t bark – or has not yet barked – in this story is the governments of those Arab states with ties to Israel, including the Gulf state signatories to the Abraham accords, along with Saudi Arabia, whose imminent “normalisation” deal with Israel Hamas was seemingly determined to derail. Despite all the bloodshed in Gaza, those states have not broken off relations with Israel – suggesting they are not that unhappy at the prospect of Hamas being functionally removed from the equation.
Borrell also called for “a political solution” – one excluding Hamas, which he described as “not a partner for anything” – to bring Israelis and Palestinians back to the two-state solution. Joe Biden, Rishi Sunak and the rest say the same thing. But here is where they, too, are guilty of misreading one of the key players – in this case, the current government of Israel.
For Biden and co are overlooking the fact that Netanyahu and his coalition are utterly opposed to the very arrangement Israel’s western allies advocate. This is the most rightwing government in Israel’s history. It includes junior ministers who fantasise about flattening Gaza with a nuclear bomb or repopulating it with the Jewish settlements that were uprooted in 2005, and senior ministers who are, even now, wrecking any chance of cooperation with the only body that could plausibly fill the vacuum in a post-Hamas Gaza: the Palestinian Authority.
If it’s not finance minister and documented bigot Bezalel Smotrich refusing to transfer tax revenues to the authority, thereby denying officials their salaries and increasing the chances they will be recruited by Hamas, it’s the ultra-nationalist with a terrorist conviction, public security minister Itamar Ben-Gvir, handing out guns to extremists known to be dangerous, all in the name of self-defence. The pair of them are heroes to the West Bank settlers who have been engaged in an under-reported campaign of violence and harassment against Palestinians – with at least 190 killed since 7 October – as if bent on igniting a third intifada in that occupied territory. Netanyahu does nothing to rein them in, because he needs their parliamentary votes to stay in power – and he needs to stay in power to be sure he stays out of jail, as he stands trial on corruption charges.
So Washington, Brussels and London currently back Israel because they agree that no peace is possible without the removal of Hamas. They are much less clear that no peace is possible without the removal of Netanyahu and his henchmen. Yet both can be true. Western governments, and those filling the streets to condemn them, need to be clear-eyed about the nature of their enemies – and their allies.
Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist
Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here.Everton’s deduction is a tremor – City and Chelsea may face the earthquakeGeologists know that sometimes what appears to be an earthquake is only a prelude to an even greater seismic event. That is worth remembering amid the tremors of the decision to dock Everton 10 points for breaching the Premier League’s profit and sustainability rules (PSR). Because for Manchester City and Chelsea a quake of a far larger magnitude is potentially looming.
City, after all, have been charged with more than 100 breaches of Premier League rules over multiple years. Chelsea are under investigation for alleged financial wrongdoing between 2012 and 2019 – and, as the Guardian revealed this week, secret payments worth tens of millions of pounds appear to have been made by companies owned by Roman Abramovich.
Everton are the first club to be punished by the league for breaking profitability and sustainability rules, and the leading sports lawyer Catherine Forshaw believes that City and Chelsea will be fearing much more severe punishments – including potential relegation.
“If you are a lawyer at these clubs, you will be more nervous after this verdict,” says Forshaw, who works at the sports law firm Brabners and has significant experience in advising national governing bodies and football clubs. “There’s precedent in place now. And compared to Chelsea and Manchester City, Everton are likely to be at the lower end of the spectrum in terms of severity. So I think relegation is certainly not out of the question.”
Another prominent sports lawyer, Nii Anteson, points to section 107 and 108 of the 41-page Everton verdict as potentially being relevant to future cases.
It was not just that the commission stressed to Everton that the “obligation to act in utmost good faith is high”, and told the club that the information supplied was “materially inaccurate” and “less than frank”.
No. Notably, they also dismissed a claim by Everton’s representative that “in the same way that a tax accountant’s job was to reduce a client’s tax exposure, an element of his job was to protect or interpret PSR rules to the benefit of his employer”.
According to Anteson, a partner and solicitor advocate at the law firm Sheridans, that is potentially quite significant in other cases. “That representative said his job is to creatively interpret the profitability and sustainability rules to benefit his employer – Everton,” he says. “But the commission in this case found that the general duty of good faith that clubs owe to the Premier League is a very high standard and trumps that.
“And frankly, because the Premier League is generally unsighted into the goings-on at a club, aside from these financial reports, which need to be submitted, it’s important that the clubs exercise the utmost care in providing those reports. So the commission found that while Everton didn’t consciously intend to circumvent the rules it failed to discharge that duty of good faith and that was one of the aggravating factors.”
That said, there were also mitigating circumstances in the Everton case. The commission, for instance, agreed that the club had “behaved openly and responsibly in its dealings with the Premier League in relation to its PSR challenges, and that behaviour should stand to its credit”.
It also noted the effects of Covid, and the other difficulties Everton had faced over the period where it went over the maximum permitted losses of £105m over three years. Even so, it decided to inflict a 10-point penalty.
All that is worth noting in City’s case. Especially as the seven-times Premier League winners are facing far more charges – including failing to give “a true and fair view of the club’s financial position”, failing to “include full details” of player and manager remuneration, failing to comply with fair play rules, and failing to cooperate in the Premier League’s investigation. They have denied wrongdoing and say that a “comprehensive body of irrefutable evidence” exists in support of their position.
Sign up to Football Daily
Kick off your evenings with the Guardian's take on the world of football
after newsletter promotion
Chelsea’s case is different again, with a new regime having come forward to the Premier League to highlight the discrepancies it found after it took over the club.
Anteson says there is a common thread between all three cases: “The Premier League is now keen to have the deterrent effect of their rules and regulations felt.”
So is the Premier League finally baring its teeth? Yes and no, says Forshaw. “They have more than one eye on the independent regulator that is due to come in,” she says. “Basically, the Premier League are saying that they want to retain some of their regulatory powers to govern their own league. This is a way of showcasing that they’re able to do that – and they will take breaches of the regulation seriously.”
So what will happen next? Everton have said they will appeal against the sanction and the finding that they failed to act with the utmost good faith. But neither Anteson or Forshaw believes they have a strong chance of completely overturning the verdict.
“It may be a case that the sanction is reduced, but they’d have to prove that there had been an unjust finding or evidence had been ignored,” says Forshaw. “And given the scrutiny of the case, and how long this has gone on for, I think it’s unlikely.”
Meanwhile, the commission chair, David Phillips KC, has given Leeds, Leicester, Burnley and Southampton – who have previously written to Everton’s prospective new owners, 777 Partners, warning they intend to pursue damages in the event of a guilty verdict – 28 days to inform the commission they want compensation. The clubs are not allowed to take separate legal action through the courts.
Chelsea and Manchester City can only wait to see what the Premier League will do next. But after Friday’s verdict one thing is clear: collars in both boardrooms will be a little more sweaty.David Cameron ‘wants to unlock billions of dollars for foreign aid’David Cameron is marking his return to frontline politics by saying he wants to unlock billions of dollars for foreign aid over the next decade, as part of a “moral mission” to help the world’s poorest people.
In a remarkable change of tone for a government that closed the Department for International Development and slashed the foreign aid budget, the former prime minister is to say he wants to push for the restoration of aid’s status in British foreign policy.
Cameron, who was appointed foreign secretary by Rishi Sunak on Monday in an astonishing political comeback, is to write in a foreword to a new international development white paper that foreign aid is even more vital, but more difficult than when he was last in office.
The internationalist tone will probably infuriate the Tory right, already angry that Cameron’s return signals a rush to the political centre ground, while his failure to formally commit extra public money to aid will dismay many charities.
Cameron will say that the UK must find fresh ways to meet the UN’s sustainable development goals, including ending global hunger by 2030.
He describes the UN goals as a remarkable achievement, adding “crucially, we made these promises to every country and person on the planet – nobody would be left behind”.
The development white paper is to be published on Monday as a global food summit is held in London. Officials say Cameron took the draft white paper home in his ministerial box on his first day in office, reading it overnight.
In office Cameron made aid a central component of “compassionate Conservatism”, committing his government to spending 0.7% of GDP on aid, and co-chairing a UN panel on extreme poverty that led in 2015 to the 17 UN sustainable development goals.
The white paper focuses on new policy approaches and ways of leveraging extra state and private funds for aid, which Cameron says could “unlock hundreds of billions of dollars over the next decade”. It does not change the economic preconditions set by Sunak for a return to spending 0.7% of GDP, after the aid budget was cut to 0.5% in 2020.
The foreign secretary will say the UK needs to move away from the old donor-recipient model towards partnerships of mutual respect, in which low- and middle-income countries have a greater say in global institutions.
“Development cannot be a closed shop, where we try to help other countries and communities without heeding their vision for the future,” he writes.
The white paper has been deliberately structured by its lead author, development minister Andrew Mitchell, to go through to 2030 in the hope that Labour would pick up its themes in what Mitchell describes as “the highly unlikely event” of the Conservatives losing the next election.
Due to Covid, reduced budgets, conflict and a decline in multilateralism, Mitchell says the world is woefully off-track reaching the UN sustainable development goals, and says new approaches are required, including providing public sector guarantees to mobilise private sector money.
Sign up to First Edition
Our morning email breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
Mitchell told the Guardian: “Where we are sweating balance sheets, releasing billions of dollars of guarantees and issuing special drawing rights to create £5.3bn of extra money, the argument whether you are spending 0.5% or 0.7 % of GDP on aid is of interest but arguably less relevant since the additional mechanisms we have found to put more money into climate finance and adaptation are more important”.
An official summary of the white paper, written by film director and aid advocate Richard Curtis, argues: “It is no longer possible, if it ever was, for a country to determine its future alone. Climate change does not respect national boundaries, nor do pandemics. Conflicts are becoming more numerous, frequent, and longer lasting. War in one country can affect security thousands of miles away. Poverty, conflict, and climate change often go hand in hand and drive flows of refugees.”
The white paper will urge more countries to follow the UK plan for debt repayments to be immediately paused when vulnerable countries are hit by extreme weather events or health emergencies, something Mitchell describes as a simple innovation that can make a huge difference.
It backs more rapid restructuring of unsustainable debt saying recent efforts have taken too long. Zambia, for instance, waited more than 18 months between staff-level agreement with the International Monetary Fund and an agreement among official creditors on a debt treatment. According to the UN, 3.3 billion people now live in countries where debt interest payments are greater than expenditure on health or education.
The white paper will call for measures to minimise the risk of holdouts to debt restructuring by bondholders.
In a major reform, British Investment International (BII), the UK’s large development investment arm, will be required to spend a minimum of half of its annual investment in low-income countries following criticisms that some of the investments have been poorly targeted at poverty alleviation. In 2022, BII investments generated £1bn ($1.3bn) of funding from elsewhere, and the businesses it backed employed 1 million people and paid $1.5bn in taxes.
In a bid to prevent humanitarian disasters, as well as alleviate them, ministers will propose a minimum of 15% of UK humanitarian spending – currently £1bn a year – to go on better preparation and adaptation.Mike Johnson to publicly release 44,000 hours of sensitive January 6 footageHouse speaker Mike Johnson said Friday he plans to publicly release thousands of hours of footage from the January 6, 2021, attack on the US Capitol, making good on a promise he made to far-right members of his party when he was campaigning for his current job.
“This decision will provide millions of Americans, criminal defendants, public interest organizations and the media an ability to see for themselves what happened that day, rather than having to rely upon the interpretation of a small group of government officials,” Johnson said in a statement.
The newly elected speaker said the first tranche of security footage, around 90 hours, will be released on a public committee website Friday, with the rest of the 44,000 hours expected to be posted over the next several months. In the meantime, a public viewing room will be set up in the Capitol.
For the last several months, the GOP-led House Administration Committee has made the video available by appointment only to members of the media, criminal defendants and a limited number of other people. The video shows some of the fighting up close and gives a bird’s-eye view of the Capitol complex – one that visitors rarely see – as hundreds of president Donald Trump’s supporters stormed the building, violently attacking police officers and breaking in through windows and doors.
By expanding this access to the general public, Johnson is fulfilling one of the pledges he made last month to the most conservative members of his party, including the representative Matt Gaetz of Florida, who orchestrated the ouster of the former speaker, Kevin McCarthy. Both Gaetz and Trump – who is currently running for re-election as he faces federal charges for his role in the January 6 attack – applauded Johnson’s decision.
In a post on his Truth Social platform, Trump congratulated the speaker “for having the courage and fortitude” to release the footage.
The move by Johnson will grant the general public a stunning level of access to sensitive and explicit January 6 security footage, which many critics have warned could endanger the safety of staff and Congressmembers in the Capitol complex if it gets into the wrong hands. The hours of footage detail not only the shocking assault rioters made on US Capitol police as they breached the building but also how the rioters accessed the building and the routes lawmakers used to flee to safety.
A request for comment from Capitol police was declined.
Johnson said Friday that the committee is processing the footage to blur the faces of individuals “to avoid any persons from being targeted for retaliation of any kind”. He added that an estimated 5% of the footage will not be publicly released as it “may involve sensitive security information related to the building architecture”.
Gripping images and video from the Capitol attack by Trump supporters have been widely circulated by documentarians, news organizations and even the rioters themselves. But until this year, officials held back much of the surveillance video from hundreds of security cameras stationed in and around the Capitol.
In February, McCarthy gave then Fox News host Tucker Carlson exclusive access to the footage, a move that Democrats swiftly condemned as a “grave” breach of security with potentially far-reaching consequences.
Sign up to First Thing
Our US morning briefing breaks down the key stories of the day, telling you what’s happening and why it matters
after newsletter promotion
The conservative commentator aired a first installment to millions of viewers on his prime-time show in the spring, working to bend perceptions of the violent, grueling siege that played out for the world to see into a narrative favorable to Trump.
It is all part of a larger effort by Republicans to redefine the narrative around the deadly insurrection after the findings of the House January 6 committee last year. The select committee of seven Democrats and two Republicans spent months painstakingly documenting, with testimony and video evidence, how Trump rallied his supporters to head to the Capitol and “fight like hell” as Congress was certifying his loss to Democrat Joe Biden.
The committee’s final report released last December concluded that Trump criminally engaged in a “multi-part conspiracy” to overturn the lawful results of the 2020 presidential election and failed to act to stop his supporters from attacking the Capitol.
The panel passed their investigation to the justice department, recommending that federal prosecutors investigate the former president on four crimes, including aiding an insurrection. In August, Trump was indicted on four felony counts for his role in the attack as the justice department accused him of assaulting the “bedrock function” of democracy.Most commentedTim Dowling: my wife says I have one job. If only that was the case …Imagine, if you will, the daily routine of a tortoise in winter: every day you wake up under the dog’s bed and set off on a series of clockwise laps around a large kitchen table.
Your visual field is wide but not very high – if the known universe has a ceiling, you have never seen it. The first three laps are flat and featureless, perfect repetitions of a cycle. But on the fourth lap half an apple suddenly appears, lying cut side up. How serendipitous! You think: I should probably eat that while I’m here, for who knows when I will next come across another … Wait, is that a grape rolling by in the distance?
I’m sitting at the kitchen table, drinking coffee, reading headlines and listening to the rhythmic thunk of the tortoise circling, followed by a pause when he finds the apple I left in his path, then more thunking, and then another pause for the grape.
After a few moments of silence I experience an unpleasant but familiar sensation: a spreading pool of tortoise piss reaching the edge of my sock.
“Ugh,” I say, lifting my foot.
“Fucking tortoise,” my wife says, entering the room, scooping him up and putting him outside the back door.
“It’s too cold,” I say.
“It’s not too cold,” she says. “It’s sunny.”
“But it will be too cold when the sun goes down,” I say, “and then I’ll have to find him in the dark.”
“That’s right,” my wife says. “You have one job.”
“Bins,” I say, holding up two fingers.
“Fine, you have two jobs.”
“Then there’s my actual job,” I say.
“And when were you thinking of making a start on that?” my wife says.
“Right now,” I say, standing and closing my laptop.
“Aren’t you going to clean this up first?” she says, pointing at the puddle of piss extending under the table.
I say nothing, but I think: that’s four jobs.
On the way to my office shed I see the tortoise on wet grass in the shadow of the house, looking glum. But when I next look up, he has disappeared.
I am hard at work when my wife opens my office door 20 minutes later – I saw her coming in time to put down my banjo and open my laptop.
“Yes?” I say, typing nonsense. “Can I help you?”
“Actually would you mind working in the house for a bit?” she says. “I’ve got to go out and there’s an important package about to be delivered.”
I stop typing and spin my chair round to face her, arms folded.
“How the tables have turned,” I say.
“Please,” she says.
“An important package, you say?”
“It’s a new radiator,” she says. “For the bathroom.”
We once tried to solve this problem by installing a second wireless doorbell in my office, but it didn’t work out. It turns out many delivery people, when faced with two doorbells, will choose to knock.
“Fine,” I say, following my wife back to the house.
The radiator arrives about 15 minutes later, but I decided not to go back to my office, because it’s warmer in the kitchen and it’s only an hour until lunch. Later that evening my wife enters the living room while I am watching the news.
“I’m hungry,” she says.
“I’ll start cooking in a minute,” I say, thinking: how many jobs is that? Five? Six?
After supper a small dispute about what to watch on TV is settled by watching what my wife wants to watch – a film she abandons three-quarters of the way through.
“I’m going to bed,” she says.
“Now?” I say.
“I’ve had a very busy day,” she says, watching me to see if I dare to say the same.
“No comment,” I say.
I stay to the end of the film, then turn off all the lights and head upstairs, where my wife is reading in bed. I remove one sock, then the other, while she watches me.
“Did you do the bins?” she says. I put my socks back on.
The path to the kerb is piled with construction waste from the ripped-out bathroom, so I have to move the car out of the drive to get the bins to the street. I think: why does life have be so hard?
Back upstairs I get undressed, brush my teeth, climb into bed and close my eyes. A minute later, when my wife turns out her reading lamp, my eyes snap open in the dark and I think: fucking tortoise.Most sharedOpenAI fires co-founder and CEO Sam Altman for allegedly lying to company boardSam Altman, the chief executive and co-founder of OpenAI, has been ousted from his own company after its board accused him of “being not consistently candid in his communications”.
Altman’s dismissal is a major shakeup in Silicon Valley. Following the launch of ChatGPT, the wildly popular chatbot developed by OpenAI, Altman became one of the world’s most visible tech executives and a sought-after expert on artificial intelligence.
In a statement on Friday, Open AI’s board “no longer has confidence in his ability to lead” and said new leadership is “necessary” as the company moves forward, said a statement posted on its website. He is likewise leaving the company’s board.
“Mr. Altman’s departure follows a deliberative review process by the board, which concluded that he was not consistently candid in his communications with the board, hindering its ability to exercise its responsibilities,” the board’s statement said. What Altman had allegedly hidden from his company’s board was not clear.
Altman tweeted a sunny message after the combative announcement.
“I loved my time at openai. it was transformative for me personally, and hopefully the world a little bit. most of all i loved working with such talented people. will have more to say about what’s next later,” he wrote.
Mira Murati, OpenAI’s CTO, will become interim CEO in his place, according to the statement. Murati has been a part of the San Francisco-based company’s leadership for five years. Greg Brockman will step down from his role as the chair of the board but will retain his other position as OpenAI president, according to the statement.
Brockman announced his departure on social media on Friday. “Based on today’s news, I quit,” he wrote.
The announcement blindsided employees, many of whom learned of the sudden ouster from an internal announcement and the company’s public facing blog. OpenAI scheduled an emergency all-hands meeting on Friday afternoon to discuss the news with employees, a person familiar with the matter told Reuters.
Altman has been regarded as the leading voice in the AI field since his company released ChatGPT in November 2022. The generative AI chatbot accrued more than 100 million users in less than a year.
The 38-year-old has led efforts to create “artificial general intelligence”, or AGI, an AI system capable of completing any task a human can achieve.
Altman helped found the company in 2015, initially as a non-profit with a $1bn endowment from high-profile backers including Elon Musk, Peter Thiel and LinkedIn co-founder Reid Hoffman. Altman and Musk served as co-chairs with a goal “to advance digital intelligence in the way that is most likely to benefit humanity as a whole, unconstrained by a need to generate financial return”. In 2019, however, OpenAI reshaped itself around a “capped profit” model with Altman as the CEO.
After releasing ChatGPT last year, Altman was thrust into the spotlight. He has been among the most vocal proponents of artificial intelligence, but has also led calls for regulation and warned that the technology comes with risks as it reshapes society. He testified before the US Congress in May about what form AI legislation should take.
Altman has long been viewed as a Silicon Valley wunderkind. In the tradition of other tech founders before him, Altman dropped out of Stanford in 2005 to launch his social-networking app, Loopt, which he later sold for $43m. He was recruited in 2014 to serve as the president of the startup accelerator Y Combinator but left in 2020 to focus on OpenAI.
The launch of ChatGPT elevated his profile significantly – he has been called the father of ChatGPT and the “Oppenheimer of our age”. Earlier this year he traveled on a 22-country tour in which he met with world leaders, including Rishi Sunak, Emmanuel Macron and Narendra Modi, among others.
Just one day before his firing, he spoke at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation conference in San Francisco where he argued that AI will be “the greatest leap forward of any of the big technological revolutions we’ve had so far”.
He also acknowledged the need for guardrails.
“I really think the world is going to rise to the occasion and everybody wants to do the right thing,” Altman said.
Stocks for Microsoft, a key business partner of OpenAI that announced this year it planned to invest billions in the company, further fell on Friday after news broke of Altman’s departure. Microsoft said the shakeup will not affect its relationship with OpenAI.
At an emergency all-hands meeting on Friday afternoon after the announcement, Murati sought to calm employees and said OpenAI’s partnership with Microsoft is stable and its backer’s executives, including CEO Satya Nadella, continue to express confidence in the startup, a person familiar with the matter told Reuters.
The Information previously reported details of the meeting.
“Microsoft remains committed to Mira and their team as we bring this next era of AI to our customers,” a spokesperson for the software maker told Reuters on Friday.
In a statement published on Microsoft’s website, Nadella added: “We have a long-term agreement with OpenAI ... Together, we will continue to deliver the meaningful benefits of this technology to the world.”
The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report